Thank you all for being here. My name is
Kevin Peter Heath. I am uh based in
Brooklyn and I'm an artist, filmmaker,
sculptor um and I mostly do live cinema
performances where I use game engines to
tell stories. Um and I make a film live
on stage and these films have then
transformed into other forms uh that we
will kind of talk about today.
So, we'll talk a little bit about my
background in uh working in commercial
virtual production and XR sort of
studios and then sort of taking that
film production technology and making
art out of it. Um some of my real-time
works um sort of congregate into a
universe called Passage, which is a
series that I'll talk about and then
talk about some next steps.
So, uh, for the past like three, four
years, I've been working full-time as
the creative director of a virtual
production studio based in New York
called Zerpace, where we have a bunch of
technologies, including LED walls and
motion captures to make, uh, commercial
works such as, uh, motion capture for a
celebrity uh, virtual concerts.
um doing a 4,000 uh 4,000 people multi-
um player Twitch stream where um
everyone sort of like inputs and chat
advances a story. Um but most of all our
bread and butter is virtual production
uh which is uh making a film with an LED
wall. So what is virtual production?
Really quick primer for you guys who
don't know. Um it was very famously sort
of made popular by the Mandalorian
during the pandemic. Um, it's using
Unreal Engine, which is a game engine to
uh put a real-time background into the
back of an LED wall and which will map
to uh the camera and then the subject is
then put into an imaginative environment
um where
the movie is made.
So what it replaces is green screen
where traditionally a lot of people have
to then imagine you know sort of what is
happening and then also you incur a lot
of baggage from the actual production of
the film process and then you offload
all of that labor onto the
post-production.
Also, one thing is that uh because it's
a game engine, just like you're playing
a video game, you're able to actually
very quickly change backgrounds, change
lighting, and do all sorts of stuff in
the back with a switch of a button. Um,
so those are kind of the benefits as
they say. So, the traditional film
production pipeline, as they say, is
this linear journey from pre-production,
you know, principal photography,
post-production. the process of virtual
production, the promise was to shift
post-production into principal
photography and sort of rejuggling that
sort of like timeline a little bit. Um,
but as I started to work there more and
more, um, I realized that there was
something a little bit more interesting
to be done, which is how can the whole
process just be the actual film itself.
Um, so that led me to my practice uh,
which is called live cinema performance.
So, what is this? Um, essentially I
design um custom sort of like
controllers and I make a movie live on
stage in a game engine. Um, I'm live
editing, lighting, uh, controlling the
environment, doing all that stuff right
in front of your eyes, all
improvisationally with a musician doing
the live score. Um, and we're going to
do a little demo.
All right,
let's test this sound.
So, typically there would be a live
music and you'll see this tonight, but
for now I'm just
Are you doing
Hey,
hey, hey. Hey,
back to
Heat. Heat.
There might
Heat. Heat. N.
Hey,
Heat. Heat.
Okay, just a quick demo.
Okay, so um that was kind of like one of
my like early pieces called Flux. um
that I was trying to sort of develop
this live cinema language and then um I
started to think about okay as a
performing arts um in terms of u
performing this on stage musicians have
instruments you know often times why are
visual artists using uh MIDI controllers
that are reserved for traditionally
electronic musicians. So started
thinking about what does a visual
instrument look like and um in here. So
I started to kind of look around and be
inspired by um the filmmaking practice
that I was brought up in. So uh cameras,
projectors, and I built a uh cinema
camera controller which uh you'll see
tonight in the performance uh later
which essentially controls the virtual
camera in the screen. So as I move it,
there's a lot of sensors inside that
moves the virtual camera. So, I'm live
sort of filming inside this world that I
made. Um,
this is it live in action.
And this is it live in action.
Um but then to recontextualize this sort
of you know this is the technology but
then the technology is there for us to
tell the stories. So what stories did I
want to tell? Um I wanted to put this
into a world that I made. So uh this is
the series called passage. Um, I was
brought up in New York City, uh,
Beijing, Hong Kong, Shanghai, a lot of
very densely metropolitan cities that
used, uh, greenery and nature as sort of
like this tool for top- down policy and
training. Um, and when I became a
digital artist, um, I was rendering
hyperrealistic foliage uh, inside the
computer. And that sort of dichotomy got
me thinking like what does nature
actually look like if born out of
computer and what is natural in this age
of mediation and control. So I started
uh imagining a forest ecosystem as a
computer circuitry board um having
essentially these living metal wires
attached to organic flora and fauna
transferring energy and uh to power the
sun up into the mountains. And there
would be various different conditions
that happen. Um, for example, this chip
would overheat as the fan would stop
running and then trigger a forest fire
which then recovers. Um, and the heat
will trigger a lightning storm that
charges the sun back on again. So, a day
and night cycle sort of doesn't happen
in natural phenomenon, but actually
through man-made events. Um so this is
manifested through passage the live
performance which will be performed
tonight at 10:30 p.m. Um which is a one
shot through um that sort of journey uh
starting underground all the way to the
top of the mountain to watch the sunrise
um and then you witness all these
phenomenons happening at the same time
but also I've started to make uh passage
into durational installations to kind of
have it live beyond just the ephemeral
sort of performative moment. So this is
one of the past works that I did uh
called passage soft rains where you get
to linger in one place instead of moving
through that um and interact with these
uh AI behavior-driven deers through this
sculptural uh sensor and uh when they
see you they call towards you and you
have this interaction with them and then
also there's another one uh that was
presented at the new museum's uh demo
festival this year where um I was doing
a sightsp specific sculpture in the
financial district in New York where uh
They had this corporate lobby and had
these trees planted there. And the tree
species is called a ficus benjamina
which in the wild actually grows very
big aerial roots. Uh but in the lobby
they're constrained very aggressively
pruned. Um so the idea was to uh use all
industrial materials found uh in that
sort of environment to create a
prosthetic uh for the tree for the roots
that it can't grow. Um and then
furthermore uh I started expanding into
other sensory dimensions this year. Uh
this is called passage cold bloom.
That's a home fragrance. Um so a room
spray u that is made from equal parts
natural ingredients and synthetic
materials. Um and in the beginning it
presents itself as a forest smells very
natural in the top notes and then it
fades away to reveal this colder sort of
more metallic undertone.
And then this last one was just done at
a residency that I came back from at um
Arizona State University um called
Passage Falling Light that sort of does
that multi- channelannel installation
that uh we were talking about to show
the cause and effect relationship
between these environments.
Um so that's basically the um so far of
my practice. So what's next? Um what I'm
really sort of starting to think about
is then uh so far a lot of the um
gestural and sort of performative
measures I'm doing on stage are
functional and operational. Uh my
movements and the textual quality of my
movements are in service of this virtual
world. But what if they start to become
expressive and choreographic on their
own? Um so I started doing a series of
explorations with the cinema controller.
Um, so shifting from essentially
just moving like this, so I'm seeing
into starting to move
and then moving the hand and then moving
the head in sort of directions that are
more and more performative. Um, so I'm
currently doing a nine-monthlong
fellowship at the Lincoln Center, uh,
developing next piece which will feature
this sort of like performative
transformation. So back to live cinema,
back to this piece. If we think about uh
the different components of a scene, um
we have the subject, the movement, uh we
have the camera language, we have the
environment. Um what if we can control
all of them uh or interact with all of
them? So um I'm planning on essentially
doing three different stations of a
cinema controller, a body controller,
and architecture controller. Here are
some very very early prototypes of what
that body controller might be in terms
of conducting bodies um and sort of
influencing them on stage. And this uh
goes into essentially a uh hybrid sort
of dance theater meets live cinema
piece. Um and what this does is um the
story that I want to tell next is uh
growing up in Shanghai when I moved
there there were three subway lines and
when I moved away there were 12. So the
city literally was uh developing being
built from above ground and underground
in front of my eyes and there's a lot of
progress that was happening and when I
lived in Silicon Valley in San Francisco
the same type of progress was happening
as well and oftentimes these progress
itself becomes performative and what is
the sort of like labor behind that mean
so essentially what this piece is going
to tackle is um is what is the labor
that it takes to perform a technical
spectacle And as we're making this on
stage in front of your eyes, we're
making a film, but then also we're
tackling like the sort of like bodily
conditions that shape this film in real
time.
Um, and the uh subject is essentially
it's going to be a virtual factory meets
construction site um inside the the
screen. And these three characters on
stage are going to be embodying a
factory admin or operators that are
going to be using these controllers to
interact with the virtual bodies inside
that are building this impossible
structure. U but over time there's sort
of blurring of who is controlling who
and there's a blurring of screen and
stage.
That's it. Thank you.